jupyter/text/Intro_sketch.md, before:

# Neural Process Family

In this tutorial, we introduce the **Neural Process Family** (NPF). Neural Processes (NPs) are a broad range of deep learning methods that model **predictive stochastic processes** via **meta-learning**. They are particularly well-suited to tasks which require fast test-time inference and well-calibrated uncertainty on continuous input domains. The goal of this tutorial is to provide a gentle introduction to the NPF. Our approach is to walk through several prominent members of the NPF, highlighting their key advantages and drawbacks. By accompanying the exposition with code and examples, we hope to (i) make the design choices and tradeoffs associated with each model clear and intuitive, and (ii) demonstrate both the simplicity of the framework and its broad applicability.

% I don't know how to put them side by side :/

```{figure} ../gifs/ConvLNP_norbf_gp_extrap.gif
---
width: 35em
name: ConvLNP_norbf_gp_extrap
alt: Samples from ConvLNP trained on GPs
---
Sample functions from the predictive stochastic process of ConvLNPs (blue) and the oracle GP (green) with periodic and noisy Matern kernels.
```

```{figure} ../images/ConvCNP_superes.png
---
width: 35em
name: ConvCNP_superes_intro
alt: Increasing image resolution with ConvCNP
---
Increasing the resolution of $16 \times 16$ CelebA to $128 \times 128$ with a ConvCNP.
```

To motivate the NPF, consider the following tasks:

- Predicting **time-series data**. We are given a dataset $D = \{(x_n, y_n)\}_{n=1}^N$, where $x$ are the inputs (time) and $y$ are the outputs. We may want to predict the distribution of a new output $p(y_*|x_*, D)$ at any test location $x_*$, or to sample an entire time-series conditioned on $D$. For example, these could be audio waveforms, and $y$ might be the sound wave amplitude. In a corrupted audio signal, we may only have $D$ measured at a sparse set of points on the $x$-axis. We then want to make predictions that interpolate and extrapolate missing values of $y$. In regions of the $x$-axis with little data, there could be many reasonable predictions --- hence we don't just want point estimates but also measures of **uncertainty**. Ideally, we could also sample the entire time-series, so we could listen to many plausible completions of the data.

- Interpolating **image data** with uncertainty estimates. For example, we may be given satellite images of a region, which may be obscured by cloud-cover, or a medical imaging scan which has some occluded regions. In both cases we might be interested not just in a single interpolation, but in the _entire probability distribution_ over them. Images can be viewed as real-valued _functions_ on the two-dimensional plane. Each input $x$ is a two-dimensional vector denoting pixel location in the image, and each $y$ is a real number representing pixel intensity (or a three-dimensional vector for RGB images).

Each member of the NPF is a method for tackling problems such as these. To do this, the NPF brings together two key ideas: **stochastic process prediction** and **meta-learning**.

## Stochastic Process Prediction

First of all, what is a stochastic process (SP)? Intuitively speaking, an SP is a probability distribution over a random _function_. Each sample from a SP is a function whose domain is the whole real line (as with time-series data) or the two-dimensional plane (as with image data). Just as VAEs or normalizing flows try to model the probability distribution over random finite-dimensional vectors, we can think of stochastic processes as the infinite-dimensional analogue for random functions. From a Bayesian point of view, an SP represents a _state of belief about an unknown function_.

In the examples given above, the underlying SP might be "the distribution over all possible natural audio signals" or "the distribution over all possible medical image scans". Observing a dataset $D = \{(x_n, y_n)\}_{n=1}^N$ is then equivalent to sampling a function from the SP and observing it at a finite set of inputs $\{x_n\}_{n=1}^N$. Once we observe $D$, our state of belief about the function changes --- we _condition_ on $D$ to obtain a new SP, called the _predictive stochastic process_. This procedure is shown in figure {numref}`ConvLNP_norbf_gp_extrap` --- as points are observed, the error bars (light blue region) and predictive samples (dark blue lines) of the Neural Process get updated.

```{note}
Figure {numref}`ConvLNP_norbf_gp_extrap` also shows the predictive mean and error-bars of the ground truth _Gaussian process_ (GP) used to generate the data. GPs are another way to specify stochastic processes. Unlike the NPF, GPs require the user to specify a kernel function to model the data. GPs are attractive due to the fact that exact prediction in GPs can be done _in closed form_. However, this has computational complexity $O(N^3)$ in the dataset size, which limits the application of exact GPs to large datasets. For an accessible introduction to GPs, see INSERT REF.

In this tutorial, we mainly use GPs to specify simple synthetic stochastic processes. We then train NPs to perform GP prediction. Since we can obtain the GP predictive distribution in closed form, we can use GPs to test the efficacy of NPs. It is important to remember, however, that NPs can model a broader range of SPs than GPs can (e.g. image data), and that NPs can learn directly from data without the need to hand-specify a kernel like GPs.   
```

As mentioned earlier, the NPF can be thought of as a synthesis of two key ideas:

1. **Modelling stochastic processes**: A more formal treatment can be achieved by considering maps from a space of finite datasets to a space of predictive stochastic processes. A general view of the NPF is as _deploying and training neural networks to approximate maps of this form_. While the majority of this tutorial avoids such mathematical constructions, this framework is useful for formalising (and proving) important statements about the NPF. As such, we allude to this view when appropriate, and provide more complete derivations and proofs in INSERT REF for the interested reader.

1. **Meta-learning**: The NPF is naturally geared for the meta-learning setting, also known as _learning to learn_. Arguably, the most prominent applications of meta-learning arise when the data for each task is sparse, motivating the need to account for **uncertainty**. As we shall see, NPF models provide an elegant framework for modelling uncertainty

```{figure} ../gifs/NPFs.gif
---
width: 30em
name: NPFs
alt: Schematic representation of CNPF computations
---
Schematic representation of NPF computations from [Marta Garnelo](https://www.martagarnelo.com/conditional-neural-processes).
```

{numref}`NPFs` [... high level intuition ? ...]

## Meta Learning Under Uncertainty

[...keep?...]

## Modeling Stochastic Processes

If you think of neural networks as a way of approximating a function $f : \mathcal{X} \to \mathcal{Y}$, then you can think of NPFs as a way of modeling a *distribution* over functions $f \sim P_{\mathcal{F}}$ (a stochastic process) conditioned on a certain set of points.

Specifically, we want to model a distribution over **target** values $\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}} := \{y^{(t)}\}_{t=1}^T$ conditioned on a set of corresponding target features $\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}} := \{x^{(t)}\}_{t=1}^T$ and a **context** set of feature-value pairs $\mathcal{C} := \{(x^{(c)}, y^{(c)})\}_{c=1}^C$.
We call such distribution $p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C})$ the **posterior predictive** as it predicts $\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}$ after (a *posteriori*) conditioning on $\mathcal{C}$.

```{note}
If you sampled $\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}$ according to $p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C})$, for all possible features $\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}=\mathcal{X}$ then you effectively sampled an entire function.
```

Outside of NPFs, stochastic processes are typically modelled by choosing the form of the distribution $p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})$ and then using rules of probabilities to infer different terms such as the posterior predictive $p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C}) = \frac{p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}},\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{C}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathbf{x}_\mathcal{C})}{p(\mathbf{y}_\mathcal{C}|\mathbf{x}_\mathcal{C})}$.
For example, this is the approach of [Gaussian Processes](https://distill.pub/2019/visual-exploration-gaussian-processes/) (GPs), which uses a multivariate normal distribution for any $p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})$.
To define a proper stochastic process using $p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})$, it essentially needs to satisfy two consistency conditions ([Kolmogorov existence theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolmogorov_extension_theorem)) that can informally be summarized as follows :

* **Permutation invariance**
$p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})=p(\pi(\mathbf{y})|\pi(\mathbf{x}))$ for all permutations $\pi$ on $1, ..., |\mathbf{y}|$. In other words, $\mathbf{x}$ and $\mathbf{y}$ are sets and should thus be unordered.

* **Consistent under marginalizaion**
$p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})= \int p(\mathbf{y}'|\mathbf{x}') p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}',\mathbf{x}') d\mathbf{y}'$, for all $\mathbf{x}'$.

By ensuring that these two condition hold, one can use standard probability rules and inherits nice mathematical properties.
Unfortunately stochastic processes are usually computationally inefficient.
For example predicting values of a target set using GPs takes time which is cubic in the context set $\mathcal{O}(|\mathcal{C}|^3)$.


```{figure} ../images/computational_graph_NPFs.svg
---
width: 300em
name: computational_graph_NPFs
alt: high level computational graph of NPF
---
High level computational graph of the Neural Process Family.
```

In contrast, the core idea of NPFs is to directly model the posterior predictive using neural networks $p( \mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}} | \mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C}) \approx q_{\boldsymbol \theta}(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}  | \mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C})$.
It does so by encoding all the context set $\mathcal{C}$ to a global representation $R$ and then decoding from it for each target point.
The core of NPFs is that the encoder is permutation invariant, i.e. treats $\mathcal{C}$ as a set, to satisfy the first consistency condition of stochastic processes.


```{warning}
Although all NPFs use permutation invariant encoders to satisfy the first consistency condition, they usually are not consistent under marginalization and thus aren't proper stochastic processes.
As a result, they sacrifice many nice mathematical properties.
[... Practical issues ? ...]
```

## NPF Members

The major difference across the NPF, lies in the chosen encoder.
Usually (see {numref}`NPFs`) it first encode each context points separately ("local encoding") $x^{(c)}, y^{(c)} \mapsto R^{(c)}$ and then aggregates those in a representation for the entire context set $\mathrm{Agg}\left(\{R^{(c)}\}_{c=1}^{C} \right) \mapsto R$ .
Conditioned on this representation, all the target values become independent (factorization assumption) $q_{\boldsymbol\theta}(\mathbf{y}_\mathcal{T} | \mathbf{x}_\mathcal{T}, R) =  \prod_{t=1}^{T} q_{\boldsymbol\theta}(y^{(t)} |  x^{(t)}, R)$.

NPFs can essentially be categorized into 2 sub-families depending on whether the global representation is treated as a latent variable ({doc}`Latent NPFs <LNPFs>`[^LNPs]) or not ({doc}`Conditional NPFs <CNPFs>`).
Inside each subfamily, the member essentially differ in how the representation is generated.
As we have already seen, the encoder is always permutation invariant. Specifically the aggregator $\mathrm{Agg}$ can be arbitrarily complex but is invariant to all permutations $\pi$ on $1, ..., C$:

```{math}
---
label: permut_inv
---
\begin{align}
\mathrm{Agg}\left( \{R^{(c)}\}_{c=1}^{C} \right)=\mathrm{Agg}\left(\pi\left(\{R^{(c)}\}_{c=1}^{C} \right)\right)
\end{align}
```

```{admonition} Theory
---
class: dropdown, caution
---
[Talk about deep sets]
```

Here's an overly simplified summary of the different NPFs that we will consider in this directory:

[... keep? ...]

```{list-table} Summary of different NPFs
---
header-rows: 1
stub-columns: 1
name: summary_npf
---

* - Model
  - Aggregator
  - Stationarity
  - Expressivity
  - Extrapolation
  - Comp. Complexity
* - {doc}`CNP <../reproducibility/CNP>` {cite}`garnelo2018conditional`,{doc}`LNP <../reproducibility/LNP>` {cite}`garnelo2018neural`
  - mean
  -
  -
  -
  - $\mathcal{O}(T+C)$
* - {doc}`AttnCNP <../reproducibility/AttnCNP>` [^AttnCNP], {doc}`AttnLNP <../reproducibility/AttnLNP>` {cite}`kim2019attentive`
  - attention
  -
  - True
  -
  - $\mathcal{O}(C(T+C))$
* - {doc}`ConvCNP <../reproducibility/ConvCNP>` {cite}`gordon2019convolutional`,{doc}`ConvLNP <../reproducibility/ConvLNP>`  {cite}`foong2020convnp`.
  - convolution
  - True
  - True
  - True
  - $\mathcal{O}(U(T+C))$
```

## Training

[...MLE + meta data...]

The parameters are estimated by minimizing the expectation of the negative conditional conditional log likelihood (or approximation thereof for LNPFs):

```{math}
:label: training
\mathrm{NL}\mathcal{L}(\boldsymbol{\theta}) := -\mathbb{E}_{\mathrm{X}_\mathcal{T}} \left[ \mathbb{E}_{\mathrm{Y}_\mathcal{T}} \left[ \mathbb{E}_{\mathcal{C}} \left[ \log q_{\boldsymbol\theta} \left(\mathbf{y}_\mathcal{T} | \mathbf{x}_\mathcal{T}, \mathcal{C} \right)\right] \right]\right]
```

We optimize it using stochastic gradient descent:

1. Sample size of context set $C \sim \mathrm{Unif}(0,|\mathcal{X}|)$
2. Sample $C$ context features $\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{C}} \sim p(\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{C}})$.
3. Sample associated values $\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{C}} \sim p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{C}} | \mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{C}})$.
4. Do the the same for the target set $\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}},\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}$ [^sampleTargets].
5. Compute the MC gradients of the negative log likelihood $- \nabla_{\pmb \theta} \sum_{t=1}^{T} \log p_{\boldsymbol \theta}(y^{(t)} | \mathbf{y}_\mathcal{C}; \mathbf{x}_\mathcal{C}, x^{(t)})$
6. Backpropagate


In practice, it means that training NPFs requires a dataset over sets of points.
This contrasts with usual neural network training which requires only a dataset of points.
In deep learning terms, we would say that it is trained through a *meta-learning* procedure.

## Usecases

[...to do...]




## Properties

[...keep?...]

NPFs generally have the following desirable properties :

* &#10003; **Preserve permutation invariance** as with stochastic processes. This comes from the permutation invariance of $\mathrm{Agg}$ (Eq. {eq}`permut_inv`) and the factorization assumption (Eq. {eq}`formal`).
 for all permutations $\pi_{\mathcal{T}}: |\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}| \to |\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|$ and $\pi_{\mathcal{C}}: |\mathbf{y}| \to |\mathbf{y}|$:

$$
p_{\boldsymbol \theta}(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}  | \mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C}) = p_{\boldsymbol \theta}(\pi_{\mathcal{T}}(\mathbf{y})|\pi_{\mathcal{T}}(\mathbf{x}), \pi_{\mathcal{C}}(\mathcal{C}))
$$

* &#10003; **Data Driven Expressivity**. NPs require specification of prior knowledge through neural network architectures rather than a kernel function (like in GPs).
The former is usually less restrictive due to its large amount of parameters and removing the need of satisfying certain mathematical properties.
Intuitively, the NPs learn an "implicit kernel function" from the data.

* &#10003; **Test-Time Scalability**. Although the computational complexity depends on the NPF they are usually more computationally efficient (at test time) than proper stochastic processes.
Typically they will be linear or quadratic in the context set instead of cubic as with GPs.
[intuituin for gain????]

These advantages come at the cost of the following disadvantages

* &#10007; **Lack of consistency under marginalizaion**. So NPFs are not proper stochastic processes.
This essentially means that even if you had infinite computational power (to be able to marginalize) and sampled points autoregressively, the order in which you do it would change the distribution over targets.
Formally, there exists $\mathbf{x}'$ such that:

$$
p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C}) \neq \int p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C},\mathbf{y}',\mathbf{x}')  
p(\mathbf{y}'|\mathbf{x}', \mathcal{C}) d\mathbf{y}'
$$

%This lack of nice mathematical properties enable NPFs to predict in a more computationally efficient way.

* &#10007; **The need for large data**. Learning requires collecting and training on a large dataset of target and context points sampled from different functions. I.e. a large dataset of datasets.

* &#10007; $\sim$ **Lack of smoothness**. Due to highly non linear behaviour of neural networks and the factorized form of the predictive distribution (Eq. {eq}`formal`), the output tends to be non-smooth compared to a GP.
This is less true in newer NPFs such as ConvCNP {cite}`gordon2019convolutional`.





[^sampleTargets]: Instead of sampling targets, we will often use all the available targets $\mathbf{x}_\mathcal{T} = \mathcal{X}$. For example, in images the targets will usually be all pixels.

[^AttnCNP]: {cite}`kim2019attentive` only introduced the latent variable model, but one can easily drop the latent variable if not needed.

[^LNPs]: In the literature the latent neural processes are just called neural processes. I use "latent" to distinguish them with the neural process family as a whole.

Commit message:

More updates to intro_sketch

jupyter/text/Intro_sketch.md, after:

# Neural Process Family

In this tutorial, we introduce the **Neural Process Family** (NPF). Neural Processes (NPs) are a broad range of deep learning methods that model **predictive stochastic processes** via **meta-learning**. They are particularly well-suited to tasks which require fast test-time inference and well-calibrated uncertainty on continuous input domains. The goal of this tutorial is to provide a gentle introduction to the NPF. Our approach is to walk through several prominent members of the NPF, highlighting their key advantages and drawbacks. By accompanying the exposition with code and examples, we hope to (i) make the design choices and tradeoffs associated with each model clear and intuitive, and (ii) demonstrate both the simplicity of the framework and its broad applicability.

% I don't know how to put them side by side :/

```{figure} ../gifs/ConvLNP_norbf_gp_extrap.gif
---
width: 35em
name: ConvLNP_norbf_gp_extrap
alt: Samples from ConvLNP trained on GPs
---
Sample functions from the predictive stochastic process of ConvLNPs (blue) and the oracle GP (green) with periodic and noisy Matern kernels.
```

```{figure} ../images/ConvCNP_superes.png
---
width: 35em
name: ConvCNP_superes_intro
alt: Increasing image resolution with ConvCNP
---
Increasing the resolution of $16 \times 16$ CelebA to $128 \times 128$ with a ConvCNP.
```

To motivate the NPF, consider the following tasks:

- Predicting **time-series data**. We are given a dataset $D = \{(x_n, y_n)\}_{n=1}^N$, where $x$ are the inputs (time) and $y$ are the outputs. We may want to predict the distribution of a new output $p(y_*|x_*, D)$ at any test location $x_*$, or to sample an entire time-series conditioned on $D$. For example, these could be audio waveforms, and $y$ might be the sound wave amplitude. In a corrupted audio signal, we may only have $D$ measured at a sparse set of points on the $x$-axis. We then want to make predictions that interpolate and extrapolate missing values of $y$. In regions of the $x$-axis with little data, there could be many reasonable predictions --- hence we don't just want point estimates but also measures of **uncertainty**. Ideally, we could also sample the entire time-series, so we could listen to many plausible completions of the data.

- Interpolating **image data** with uncertainty estimates. For example, we may be given satellite images of a region, which may be obscured by cloud-cover, or a medical imaging scan which has some occluded regions. In both cases we might be interested not just in a single interpolation, but in the _entire probability distribution_ over them. Images can be viewed as real-valued _functions_ on the two-dimensional plane. Each input $x$ is a two-dimensional vector denoting pixel location in the image, and each $y$ is a real number representing pixel intensity (or a three-dimensional vector for RGB images).

Each member of the NPF is a method for tackling problems such as these. To do this, the NPF brings together two key ideas: **stochastic process prediction** and **meta-learning**.

## Stochastic Process Prediction

First of all, what is a stochastic process (SP)? Intuitively speaking, an SP is a probability distribution over a random _function_. Each sample from a SP is a function whose domain is the whole real line (as with time-series data) or the two-dimensional plane (as with image data). Just as VAEs or normalizing flows try to model the probability distribution over random finite-dimensional vectors, we can think of stochastic processes as the infinite-dimensional analogue for random functions. From a Bayesian point of view, an SP represents a _state of belief about an unknown function_.

In the examples given above, the underlying SP might be "the distribution over all possible natural audio signals" or "the distribution over all possible medical image scans". Observing a dataset $D = \{(x_n, y_n)\}_{n=1}^N$ is then equivalent to sampling a function from the SP and observing it at a finite set of inputs $\{x_n\}_{n=1}^N$. Once we observe $D$, our state of belief about the function changes --- we _condition_ on $D$ to obtain a new SP, called the _predictive stochastic process_. This procedure is shown in {numref}`ConvLNP_norbf_gp_extrap` --- as points are observed, the error bars (light blue region) and predictive samples (dark blue lines) of the Neural Process get updated.

```{note}
{numref}`ConvLNP_norbf_gp_extrap` also shows the predictive mean and error-bars of the ground truth _Gaussian process_ (GP) used to generate the data. GPs are another way to specify stochastic processes. Unlike the NPF, GPs require the user to specify a kernel function to model the data. GPs are attractive due to the fact that exact prediction in GPs can be done _in closed form_. However, this has computational complexity $O(N^3)$ in the dataset size, which limits the application of exact GPs to large datasets. For an accessible introduction to GPs, see INSERT REF.

In this tutorial, we mainly use GPs to specify simple synthetic stochastic processes for benchmarking. We then train NPs to perform GP prediction. Since we can obtain the GP predictive distribution in closed form, we can use GPs to test the efficacy of NPs. It is important to remember, however, that NPs can model a broader range of SPs than GPs can (e.g. image data), are more computationally efficient at test time, and can learn directly from data without the need to hand-specify a kernel.   
```

From this perspective, the task of SP prediction can be thought of as a _map_ from datasets $D$ to SPs --- for every dataset we might observe, the predictor returns the corresponding predictive SP. However, we immediately run into an obstacle --- since the space of functions is infinite-dimensional, how can we actually specify an SP in practice?

More concretely, let the input space be $\mathcal{X}$ (e.g. time) and the output space be $\mathcal{Y}$ (e.g. amplitude). Let $f: \mathcal{X} \to \mathcal{Y}$ be a random function. We say that $f \sim P$, where $P$ is the distribution of $f$ --- a stochastic process. To sample an entire function from $P$ would require specifying $f(x)$ for all $x \in \mathcal{X}$, which would require infinite memory and computation. To get around this, we specify the _finite marginals_ of $P$: the distributions of $\{f(x_i) \}_{i=1}^N$ for all possible finite collections of inputs $(x_1, \hdots x_N)$. For a fixed choice of inputs, $\{f(x_i) \}_{i=1}^N$ is just a finite-dimensional random vector. However, we cannot just choose any set of finite marginals to specify an SP: they must be _consistent_, as shown below.

## Meta-learning Under Uncertainty

As mentioned earlier, the NPF can be thought of as a synthesis of two key ideas:

1. **Modelling stochastic processes**: A more formal treatment can be achieved by considering maps from a space of finite datasets to a space of predictive stochastic processes. A general view of the NPF is as _deploying and training neural networks to approximate maps of this form_. While the majority of this tutorial avoids such mathematical constructions, this framework is useful for formalising (and proving) important statements about the NPF. As such, we allude to this view when appropriate, and provide more complete derivations and proofs in INSERT REF for the interested reader.

1. **Meta-learning**: The NPF is naturally geared for the meta-learning setting, also known as _learning to learn_. Arguably, the most prominent applications of meta-learning arise when the data for each task is sparse, motivating the need to account for **uncertainty**. As we shall see, NPF models provide an elegant framework for modelling uncertainty

```{figure} ../gifs/NPFs.gif
---
width: 30em
name: NPFs
alt: Schematic representation of CNPF computations
---
Schematic representation of NPF computations from [Marta Garnelo](https://www.martagarnelo.com/conditional-neural-processes).
```

{numref}`NPFs` [... high level intuition ? ...]

## Meta Learning Under Uncertainty

[...keep?...]

## Modeling Stochastic Processes

If you think of neural networks as a way of approximating a function $f : \mathcal{X} \to \mathcal{Y}$, then you can think of NPFs as a way of modeling a *distribution* over functions $f \sim P_{\mathcal{F}}$ (a stochastic process) conditioned on a certain set of points.

Specifically, we want to model a distribution over **target** values $\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}} := \{y^{(t)}\}_{t=1}^T$ conditioned on a set of corresponding target features $\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}} := \{x^{(t)}\}_{t=1}^T$ and a **context** set of feature-value pairs $\mathcal{C} := \{(x^{(c)}, y^{(c)})\}_{c=1}^C$.
We call such distribution $p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C})$ the **posterior predictive** as it predicts $\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}$ after (a *posteriori*) conditioning on $\mathcal{C}$.

```{note}
If you sampled $\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}$ according to $p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C})$, for all possible features $\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}=\mathcal{X}$ then you effectively sampled an entire function.
```

Outside of NPFs, stochastic processes are typically modelled by choosing the form of the distribution $p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})$ and then using rules of probabilities to infer different terms such as the posterior predictive $p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C}) = \frac{p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}},\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{C}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathbf{x}_\mathcal{C})}{p(\mathbf{y}_\mathcal{C}|\mathbf{x}_\mathcal{C})}$.
For example, this is the approach of [Gaussian Processes](https://distill.pub/2019/visual-exploration-gaussian-processes/) (GPs), which uses a multivariate normal distribution for any $p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})$.
To define a proper stochastic process using $p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})$, it essentially needs to satisfy two consistency conditions ([Kolmogorov existence theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolmogorov_extension_theorem)) that can informally be summarized as follows :

* **Permutation invariance**
$p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})=p(\pi(\mathbf{y})|\pi(\mathbf{x}))$ for all permutations $\pi$ on $1, ..., |\mathbf{y}|$. In other words, $\mathbf{x}$ and $\mathbf{y}$ are sets and should thus be unordered.

* **Consistent under marginalizaion**
$p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x})= \int p(\mathbf{y}'|\mathbf{x}') p(\mathbf{y}|\mathbf{x},\mathbf{y}',\mathbf{x}') d\mathbf{y}'$, for all $\mathbf{x}'$.

By ensuring that these two condition hold, one can use standard probability rules and inherits nice mathematical properties.
Unfortunately stochastic processes are usually computationally inefficient.
For example predicting values of a target set using GPs takes time which is cubic in the context set $\mathcal{O}(|\mathcal{C}|^3)$.


```{figure} ../images/computational_graph_NPFs.svg
---
width: 300em
name: computational_graph_NPFs
alt: high level computational graph of NPF
---
High level computational graph of the Neural Process Family.
```

In contrast, the core idea of NPFs is to directly model the posterior predictive using neural networks $p( \mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}} | \mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C}) \approx q_{\boldsymbol \theta}(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}  | \mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C})$.
It does so by encoding all the context set $\mathcal{C}$ to a global representation $R$ and then decoding from it for each target point.
The core of NPFs is that the encoder is permutation invariant, i.e. treats $\mathcal{C}$ as a set, to satisfy the first consistency condition of stochastic processes.


```{warning}
Although all NPFs use permutation invariant encoders to satisfy the first consistency condition, they usually are not consistent under marginalization and thus aren't proper stochastic processes.
As a result, they sacrifice many nice mathematical properties.
[... Practical issues ? ...]
```

## NPF Members

The major difference across the NPF, lies in the chosen encoder.
Usually (see {numref}`NPFs`) it first encode each context points separately ("local encoding") $x^{(c)}, y^{(c)} \mapsto R^{(c)}$ and then aggregates those in a representation for the entire context set $\mathrm{Agg}\left(\{R^{(c)}\}_{c=1}^{C} \right) \mapsto R$ .
Conditioned on this representation, all the target values become independent (factorization assumption) $q_{\boldsymbol\theta}(\mathbf{y}_\mathcal{T} | \mathbf{x}_\mathcal{T}, R) =  \prod_{t=1}^{T} q_{\boldsymbol\theta}(y^{(t)} |  x^{(t)}, R)$.

NPFs can essentially be categorized into 2 sub-families depending on whether the global representation is treated as a latent variable ({doc}`Latent NPFs <LNPFs>`[^LNPs]) or not ({doc}`Conditional NPFs <CNPFs>`).
Inside each subfamily, the member essentially differ in how the representation is generated.
As we have already seen, the encoder is always permutation invariant. Specifically the aggregator $\mathrm{Agg}$ can be arbitrarily complex but is invariant to all permutations $\pi$ on $1, ..., C$:

```{math}
---
label: permut_inv
---
\begin{align}
\mathrm{Agg}\left( \{R^{(c)}\}_{c=1}^{C} \right)=\mathrm{Agg}\left(\pi\left(\{R^{(c)}\}_{c=1}^{C} \right)\right)
\end{align}
```

```{admonition} Theory
---
class: dropdown, caution
---
[Talk about deep sets]
```

Here's an overly simplified summary of the different NPFs that we will consider in this directory:

[... keep? ...]

```{list-table} Summary of different NPFs
---
header-rows: 1
stub-columns: 1
name: summary_npf
---

* - Model
  - Aggregator
  - Stationarity
  - Expressivity
  - Extrapolation
  - Comp. Complexity
* - {doc}`CNP <../reproducibility/CNP>` {cite}`garnelo2018conditional`,{doc}`LNP <../reproducibility/LNP>` {cite}`garnelo2018neural`
  - mean
  -
  -
  -
  - $\mathcal{O}(T+C)$
* - {doc}`AttnCNP <../reproducibility/AttnCNP>` [^AttnCNP], {doc}`AttnLNP <../reproducibility/AttnLNP>` {cite}`kim2019attentive`
  - attention
  -
  - True
  -
  - $\mathcal{O}(C(T+C))$
* - {doc}`ConvCNP <../reproducibility/ConvCNP>` {cite}`gordon2019convolutional`,{doc}`ConvLNP <../reproducibility/ConvLNP>`  {cite}`foong2020convnp`.
  - convolution
  - True
  - True
  - True
  - $\mathcal{O}(U(T+C))$
```

## Training

[...MLE + meta data...]

The parameters are estimated by minimizing the expectation of the negative conditional conditional log likelihood (or approximation thereof for LNPFs):

```{math}
:label: training
\mathrm{NL}\mathcal{L}(\boldsymbol{\theta}) := -\mathbb{E}_{\mathrm{X}_\mathcal{T}} \left[ \mathbb{E}_{\mathrm{Y}_\mathcal{T}} \left[ \mathbb{E}_{\mathcal{C}} \left[ \log q_{\boldsymbol\theta} \left(\mathbf{y}_\mathcal{T} | \mathbf{x}_\mathcal{T}, \mathcal{C} \right)\right] \right]\right]
```

We optimize it using stochastic gradient descent:

1. Sample size of context set $C \sim \mathrm{Unif}(0,|\mathcal{X}|)$
2. Sample $C$ context features $\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{C}} \sim p(\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{C}})$.
3. Sample associated values $\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{C}} \sim p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{C}} | \mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{C}})$.
4. Do the the same for the target set $\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}},\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}$ [^sampleTargets].
5. Compute the MC gradients of the negative log likelihood $- \nabla_{\pmb \theta} \sum_{t=1}^{T} \log p_{\boldsymbol \theta}(y^{(t)} | \mathbf{y}_\mathcal{C}; \mathbf{x}_\mathcal{C}, x^{(t)})$
6. Backpropagate


In practice, it means that training NPFs requires a dataset over sets of points.
This contrasts with usual neural network training which requires only a dataset of points.
In deep learning terms, we would say that it is trained through a *meta-learning* procedure.

## Usecases

[...to do...]




## Properties

[...keep?...]

NPFs generally have the following desirable properties :

* &#10003; **Preserve permutation invariance** as with stochastic processes. This comes from the permutation invariance of $\mathrm{Agg}$ (Eq. {eq}`permut_inv`) and the factorization assumption (Eq. {eq}`formal`).
 for all permutations $\pi_{\mathcal{T}}: |\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}| \to |\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|$ and $\pi_{\mathcal{C}}: |\mathbf{y}| \to |\mathbf{y}|$:

$$
p_{\boldsymbol \theta}(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}  | \mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C}) = p_{\boldsymbol \theta}(\pi_{\mathcal{T}}(\mathbf{y})|\pi_{\mathcal{T}}(\mathbf{x}), \pi_{\mathcal{C}}(\mathcal{C}))
$$

* &#10003; **Data Driven Expressivity**. NPs require specification of prior knowledge through neural network architectures rather than a kernel function (like in GPs).
The former is usually less restrictive due to its large amount of parameters and removing the need of satisfying certain mathematical properties.
Intuitively, the NPs learn an "implicit kernel function" from the data.

* &#10003; **Test-Time Scalability**. Although the computational complexity depends on the NPF they are usually more computationally efficient (at test time) than proper stochastic processes.
Typically they will be linear or quadratic in the context set instead of cubic as with GPs.
[intuituin for gain????]

These advantages come at the cost of the following disadvantages

* &#10007; **Lack of consistency under marginalizaion**. So NPFs are not proper stochastic processes.
This essentially means that even if you had infinite computational power (to be able to marginalize) and sampled points autoregressively, the order in which you do it would change the distribution over targets.
Formally, there exists $\mathbf{x}'$ such that:

$$
p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C}) \neq \int p(\mathbf{y}_{\mathcal{T}}|\mathbf{x}_{\mathcal{T}}, \mathcal{C},\mathbf{y}',\mathbf{x}')  
p(\mathbf{y}'|\mathbf{x}', \mathcal{C}) d\mathbf{y}'
$$

%This lack of nice mathematical properties enable NPFs to predict in a more computationally efficient way.

* &#10007; **The need for large data**. Learning requires collecting and training on a large dataset of target and context points sampled from different functions. I.e. a large dataset of datasets.

* &#10007; $\sim$ **Lack of smoothness**. Due to highly non linear behaviour of neural networks and the factorized form of the predictive distribution (Eq. {eq}`formal`), the output tends to be non-smooth compared to a GP.
This is less true in newer NPFs such as ConvCNP {cite}`gordon2019convolutional`.





[^sampleTargets]: Instead of sampling targets, we will often use all the available targets $\mathbf{x}_\mathcal{T} = \mathcal{X}$. For example, in images the targets will usually be all pixels.

[^AttnCNP]: {cite}`kim2019attentive` only introduced the latent variable model, but one can easily drop the latent variable if not needed.

[^LNPs]: In the literature the latent neural processes are just called neural processes. I use "latent" to distinguish them with the neural process family as a whole.
